RFC: Unicode strings and characters (#13)
dafny-lang/rfcs: 0012-unicode-strings.md

- Feature Name: unicode_strings
- Start Date: 2022-07-06
- RFC PR: [dafny-lang/rfcs#13](https://github.com/dafny-lang/rfcs/pull/13)
- Dafny Issue: [dafny-lang/dafny#413](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/413)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

The Dafny `string` type is an alias for the type `seq<char>`, and the `char` type is an opaque built-in type
representing individual characters. `char` values can be converted to and from `int` values (using `as char` and `as int` expressions),
and an `int` value corresponding to a `char` value is currently required to be a valid UTF-16 code unit, i.e. in the range
`[0, 65536)`. This range includes the so-called ["surrogate" code points](https://unicode.org/faq/utf_bom.html#utf16-2),

> i.e. values in the range `[0xD800, 0xDFFF]`,

Reviewer: Continue using half-open intervals: `[0xD800, 0xE000)`.

which must be used in pairs in order to encode some characters in UTF-16,
and are not assignable Unicode code points themselves.

I propose a breaking change in Dafny 4.0, to make `char` represent any Unicode code point, independent of the encoding used.

> This means that the corresponding `int` value for a `char` must always be a [Unicode scalar value](https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode14.0.0/ch03.pdf#G7404), meaning any value in the range `[0, 0x10FFFF]` but excluding the surrogate code points from `[0xD800, 0xDFFF]`.

Reviewer: Use half-open intervals, here and throughout: `[0, 0x11_0000)`.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The two primary motivations behind this change are correctness and compatibility.

## Correctness

The current definition of these types means that the Dafny `string` type allows data that is not a valid Unicode string.

> The value `"\uD800"`, for example, is not a valid Unicode string and has no valid encoding in UTF-8, UTF-16,

Reviewer 2: I think it would be worth trying to align this document's terminology with the standard Unicode terms.  IIRC `Unicode string` refers to a sequence of code units (ie after encoding), so the first part is valid (it's not a valid unicode string), but the second part is unclear ("has no valid encoding")

Author: You're right, and unfortunately I can't find any standard terminology for the abstract "sequence of scalar values" concept that is ultimately what I want `string` to represent.

or any other encoding.
This means that any logic to process strings must manually specify pre-conditions to exclude invalid values, or
be less precise with its specification. For example, an implementation of UTF-8 encoding would have to reject
invalid inputs in a pre-condition, dynamically fail if given invalid strings, or implement a lossy encoding by
discarding or replacing invalid characters.

## Compatibility

The current definitions of `string` and `char` are biased towards using a UTF-16 encoding at runtime.

> This aligns well with some compilation target languages which also use UTF-16, such as Java, C#, and JavaScript, 

Reviewer 2: But C# and Javascript don't use UTF-16, since they don't enforce well-formedness.

Author: Fine :) Qualified a bit here but will address this more concretely in the Runtime section.

This means that surrogate code points, meaning those in the range `[0xD800, 0xDFFF]`, are no longer allowed. This also means
code points that require more than 16 bits, meaning those in the range `[0x10000, 0x1FFFF]`, are now directly representable
as `char` values.

The definition of the `char` type is controlled by a command-line switch called `/unicodeChar`, where `/unicodeChar:0`
enables the previous semantics and `/unicodeChar:1` enables the new semantics described above.
The default prior to Dafny 4.0 is `/unicodeChar:0`, but the default as of Dafny 4.0 is `/unicodeChar:1`.
This change in definition can cause previously verified code to no longer verify,
since expressions such as `someIntValue as char` or `someCharValue + 'a'` are no longer allowed to result in
surrogate code points.

This change can also result in behavioral changes that may not be caught by verification,
as they may not intersect with any explicit specifications.
Here is an example of a program that will behave differently depending on the value of `/unicodeChar`,
and hence differently on Dafny 4.0 compared to earlier versions:

```dafny
method Main() {

>   var s := "Unicode is just so \ud83d\ude0e";

Reviewer: This line ought to give an error with `/unicodeChar:1`, since `\ud83d` is not a legal character.

Author: Turns out I'm on board with that after all. :)

>   var s := "Unicode is just so \ud83d\ude0e";

Reviewer 2: Up to this point the document hasn't addressed the representation of string literals, so I'm having trouble parsing the example.  What does this string represent with `unicodeChar:1`?

Author: I pulled a fair bit of content specifically on string literals to the early parts of this section, hopefully it helps!

Author: Hopefully not supporting `\uXXXX` with `\unicodeChar:1` any longer helps clear this up.

  print s, "\n"     // "Unicode is just so 😎" (not affected by /unicodeChar)
  print |s|, "\n"   // /unicodeChar:0 => "21"
                    // /unicodeChar:1 => "20"
  print s[19], "\n" // /unicodeChar:0 => "�"
                    // /unicodeChar:1 => "😎"
}
```

A related but largely orthogonal issue has also been addressed.
Dafny source code files must be encoded in UTF-8,
but in previous versions of Dafny,
string and character literals could only contain printable and white-space ASCII characters,
due to a limitation of the Coco/R parser generator the toolchain uses.

> This has been fixed, and both standard form and verbatim form string literals now allow any Unicode characters.

Reviewer 3: What has been fixed? The Coco/R parser?

Author: This section is intended to describe the desired end state for Dafny users, so it's describing a future state. :)

I'm saying I can see where the issue is (specifically in our copy of [`Scanner.frame`](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/blob/master/Source/Dafny/Coco/Scanner.frame#L318), which is creating a `Buffer` when it should be creating a `UTF8Buffer`) so I'm proposing we fix that.

Author: FYI this part has been actually fixed now: https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/pull/2717 :)

> A second form of escape sequence accepting a hexadecimal number with up to six digits, `\u{XXXXXX}`, 

Reviewer: Is the "up to" just for `char` literals? If it were to apply also to `string`, then does `"\ua0"` mean the 1-character string containing the ASCII character 160, or does it mean the 2-character string containing the ASCII characters 16 and 48?

Oh, are the curly braces required?

Author: `"\ua0"` is currently not legal, and would remain not legal, because `uXXXX` escapes require exactly 4 characters, to avoid this exact ambiguity.

`"\u{a0}"` would mean the 1-`char` string containing the ASCII character 160.

(And as I type this I am leaning closer to making it `"\U{a0}"` instead :) )

is now provided to support characters outside of the Basic Multilingual Plane
using their direct Unicode code points instead of using surrogates.
These changes are fully backwards-compatible and not controlled by the `unicodeChar` flag.

```dafny
// Several different ways to express the same string literal

> var s1 := "Unicode is just so \ud83d\ude0e";

Reviewer: I propose we forbid this under `/unicodeChar:1`. After all, neither `\ud83d` nor `\ude0e` falls into the numeric ranges of the new `char`.

Author: I didn't see a reason to reject valid string literals using the existing escape pattern, personally. I can make this clearer in the proposal, but we can keep both forms with these semantics:

1. `\uXXXX` - UTF-16 code unit, incorrect use of surrogates rejected by the parser.
2. `\u{X}`...`\u{XXXXXX}` - Unicode scalar value, surrogate range values rejected by the parser.

There is precedent for supporting both, as Go allows both `\uXXXX` and `\UXXXXXXXX`. I liked the variable-length syntax of `\u{X..X}` (also used by Swift) better personally, as exactly requiring exactly eight digits just means the first two will always be `00` :)

I'm open to using `U` for the second form if it helps reduce confusion though.

Author: Note we should avoid any implication that a single escape sequence produces a single "character", since neither form can produce 🇨🇦 that way. We will only know that a single `u{X..X}` sequence will produce a single `char` (and that's not ultimately that meaningful anyway).

Author: Revision 2 now says we only have `\U{XXXXXX}` with `/unicodeChar:1`

Author: Also I realized that in Go `\uXXXX` still specifies Unicode code points rather than UTF-16 code units, that is, it rejects surrogate code points (and hence https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/1980 :)

var s2 := "Unicode is just so \u{1F60E}";
var s3 := "Unicode is just so 😎";
var s4 := @"Unicode is just so 😎";  // Escape sequences are not supported in verbatim strings
```

The exact representation of strings at runtime, including the particular encoding,
is an implementation detail of a particular backend, and will often be optimized for the idioms and support

> of the target environment. Enabling Unicode characters will change the target language types used to

Reviewer: Yes!

> represent characters and strings, and hence may cause compilation errors when using additional external

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represent characters and strings, and hence may be a breaking change when using additional external
```

target language code.

Note also that although the Unicode scalar value concept is more general than UTF-16 code units,
it still does not always correspond to what humans will perceive as single atomic characters when rendered.
For example, the string `"e\u0301"` contains two Unicode scalar values, but renders as the single character `é`.
See the concept of grapheme clusters [here](https://unicode.org/reports/tr29/) for more details.
The proposed change to the `char` type is only intended to allow the Dafny language to safely abstract

> away from encodings, especially to support verifiably-correct code that must compile to multiple target languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
away from encodings, especially to support correct code that must compile to multiple target languages.
```

Providing more of the concepts defined by the Unicode standard is left out of scope for this proposal,
under the assumption that it will enable such implementations via Dafny source code in sharable libraries instead.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Verification

The change to the definition of `char` in the `DafnyPrelude.bpl` file is minimal.
The only change is to replace expressions such as `0 <= n && n < 65536` with a separate predicate defined as follows:

```boogie
function char#IsUnicodeScalarValue(n: int): bool {
  (0                  <= n && n <= 55295   /* 0xD7FF */) || 

>   (57344 /* 0xE000 */ <= n && n <= 1114111 /* 0x10FFFF */ )

Reviewer: Use half-open intervals.

Author: The only reason I used closed intervals throughout is because that's what the Unicode standard itself does. It's always irked me, but as a result the constant `0xDFFF` tends to be much more well-known than `0xE000`.

I will absolutely use half-open intervals here as it will probably verify more efficiently, and I'm happy to change the proposal accordingly if it would help readability.

Author: Ended up going with half-open intervals for consistency.

meaning a program that does not pass data over an interface with external code.
The only difference is that the `char` type will need to be compiled to a native datatype
that supports 32 bits of data (or technically 21 according to the actual Unicode scalar value range)
rather than 16 bits as previous versions did.
Many target languages will have dedicated types designed to hold any Unicode scalar value,
such as the `char` primitive type in Rust or the `rune` alias for `int32` in Go.

The main complexity in implementing this change is minimizing the migration pain for
code bases that use `{:extern}` definitions to pass string values in and out of the Dafny runtime.
This generally requires converting between the internal representation of Dafny strings
and the native implementation in the target language,
e.g. between `Dafny.ISequence<char>` and `System.String` in C#.
Even there, the various Dafny runtime libraries provide helper methods that can be adjusted 
to work with the new semantics of Unicode characters.
In the C# runtime, for example, the `Sequence.FromString(string)` method converts a native string

> to a equivalent `Dafny.ISequence<char>` copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to an equivalent `Dafny.ISequence<char>` copy.
```

> A parallel method named something similar to `Sequence.UnicodeFromString(string)` could be added

Reviewer: We should document and officially support the way to get to these conversion routines from Dafny. More precisely, we should give the `:extern` declarations one needs to write in the Dafny source to get to these routines. For C#, that may be:

``` dafny
type {:extern} NativeString
function {:extern "Dafny.ConvertStringToNative"} StringToNative(s: string): NativeString
function {:extern "Dafny.ConvertNativeToString"} NativeToString(s': NativeString): string
```

Reviewer 2: These functions are not total: not all C# or Javascript strings will be representable in `/unicodeChar:1`.

Author: I would specifically recommend against having any `NativeString` type, because it won't behave consistently across runtimes. I'm recommending instead having these adaptors defined in each runtime independently, so they can either trust the underlying native string semantics or check for and reject invalid values as appropriate. I'll expand the detail on those adaptors and make this clearer.

that would return a `Dafny.ISequence<uint32>` copy instead.
Migrating an existing codebase should reduce to a simple find-and-replace operation.

Each runtime should also make it possible to wrap an idiomatic representation of a Unicode string
as the runtime representation of the Dafny `seq<char>` type, without having to make an additional copy. 
At the time of writing this, only the Java runtime supports this feature,
via a `StringDafnySequence` class that wraps a `java.lang.String` value and implements the `ISequence<Character>` interface.
Another similar parallel `UnicodeStringDafnySequence` adaptor can be provided that implements `ISequence<Integer>` instead.

The one wrinkle with this feature is that methods such as `select(i)`, which implement Dafny expressions such as `s[i]`,
currently take constant time on an `StringDafnySequence`, since a `java.lang.String` also stores its contents as UTF-16
code units. However, if `UnicodeStringDafnySequence.select(i)` will need to produce the i'th Unicode scalar value instead,
this will require decoding all characters up to that index, which will take linear time in general instead.

> The solution will be to lazily decode strings into their UTF-32 encoded equivalent (i.e. sequence of scalar values)

Reviewer 2: This is going to be very costly; couldn't we cache positions instead, or even store just one position?

Reviewer 4: If the point of `StringDafnySequence ` and `UnicodeStringDafnySequence` is to avoid having to make a costly copy of the string, but then accessing individual elements from these sequences is still costly, is there still a point to having them? Would it not be better to force the user to explicitly convert between the native and Dafny string, so they're most aware of the performance cost?

Author: I'll add more detail on these wrappers to the actual proposal, but many operations on strings won't need to force decoding because they can operate sequentially on the encoded form, including length, equality, hash code, quantification (i.e. `exists x <- s | 'A' <= x < 'Z'`). Tons of string values will only ever be used as constants and keys in `map`s, and therefore never indexed.

I originally considered caching individual positions, but I assert that most instances of randomly-accessing string positions will hit many such positions in the string: consider parsing workflows, for example. Given calculating the index of any individual character in an encoded string requires scanning from the beginning, and therefore determining the index for all previous characters too, it seems a shame not to hold on to that information. But then in most runtimes indexes into sequences will be 32-bit values anyway, so in some ways it is more memory efficient to just replace the encoded value with the sequence of scalar values as soon as any random access happens. This actually aligns with how Unicode recommends handling encodings anyway: something like UTF-8 is more efficient for storage or APIs, but it's a good idea to decode to UTF-32 if you're doing substantial string processing.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I'm not sold.  Caching the latest `(index, position)` pair is pretty straightforward and sufficient, no?

Reviewer 2: (And allocation is costly)

Author: Yup, if the accesses are in non-decreasing order (and I would expect that even in the parsing use case), that would be sufficient. The downside is having to ensure that mutable state is thread-safe, and that concurrent access will completely destroy the benefits of the cache. 

I'm very comfortable with presenting both solutions as viable options in this proposal, though, and benchmarking on real programs to decide on a solution based on data. Once https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/2390 is implemented, it will be very easy to implement both options once in Dafny and test it on each target language. :) I'm less worried about the safety of mutable state in the implementation of immutable values now that I've got a language-agnostic solution in the works: https://github.com/robin-aws/dafny/blob/dafny-runtime-in-dafny/Source/DafnyRuntimeDafny/src/dafnyRuntime.dfy#L296

on the first operation that requires it. This mirrors the optimization of evaluating concatenation of sequences
lazily in the current C# and Java runtimes, and means that in most code that manipulates individual characters,
the amortized runtime of indexing operations will still be constant.

Note that this optimization will also help offset the fact that materializing and manipulating individual `char` values
will in general require twice as much memory after this change.
The compiler can leverage this support to initially store string literal values as UTF-8 bytes,
and operations such as concatenation or equality comparisons can be implemented

> without having to decode these bytes into character values.

Reviewer 2: The proposal does not address distinguishing `seq<char>` and `string` at the language level.  Do we want to keep `string` an alias of `seq<char>`?   Will that not make our lives harder at the compiler level? (I'm worried about e.g. polymorphic functions over `seq<T>`.

Reviewer 2: That being said, if we change `seq<T>` from a type to a trait, it would be nice to make `string` implement `seq<char>`

Author: Split this off as a separate discussion: https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/2582

Author: This is one point I didn't burden the proposal with, but I'll say two things:

* https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/issues/2582 makes me think that we don't really need to distinguish `string` from `seq<T>` at runtime in general.
* I'd say that being able to define `seq<T>` in Dafny ala https://github.com/robin-aws/dafny/blob/dafny-runtime-in-dafny/Source/DafnyRuntime/DafnyRuntimeDafny/src/dafnyRuntime.dfy#L382 will provide much of the same benefit as literally making `seq<T>` a trait directly.

Reviewer 2: > I'd say that being able to define seq<T> in Dafny … will provide much of the same benefit as literally making seq<T> a trait directly.

Yep, 100% this

is not being split up. 
It also does not reduce the complexity of compiling
strings to various target languages that do not necessarily use UTF-16.

## Define "valid UTF-16 strings" as a subset type in a shared library

The next cheapest solution would be to define a subset type of `string` that enforces
correct usage of surrogate characters.
Similar such definitions already exist for valid [UTF-8](https://github.com/aws/aws-encryption-sdk-dafny/blob/mainline/src/Util/UTF8.dfy#L21)
and [UTF-16](https://github.com/dafny-lang/libraries/blob/master/src/Unicode/Utf16EncodingForm.dfy) code unit sequences
in some Dafny codebases.
This also introduces the same proof obligations as the previous solution,
although here they could be proved by numerous helper methods that operate on the subset type
in the same shared library.

This would likely be the best solution if changing the Dafny language itself was not an option.
The major downside is that built-in sequence operations such as `s[i]` and `s + s'` would still require additional
effort to achieve verification, or would have to be abandoned entirely in favour of the helper methods
provided by the shared library.

> ## Change the definition of the `string` type

Reviewer 4: The section describes downsides of having a standalone `string` type, but what are the upsides?

I think one aspect to consider is managing expectations. If you have `type string = seq<char>`, then what performance expectations will the user have of accessing individual characters of that string, and do those align with what we're providing?

With a custom `string` type, you can define a fresh performance contract, such as that accessing a specific character may be linear time. With that, you would be free to encode the Dafny type `nativestring` using native strings. I don't think that's the right thing to do, but it seems like a benefit of this approach that isn't mentioned. Or you could have a type `nativestring` that doesn't have an API for accessing individual characters, that way users that are processing strings but only in a simple fashion, can keep using native strings instead of the memory heavy, have to be converted when using external code, Dafny strings.

The current definition of `string` as an alias for `seq<char>` is problematic because surrogate code points
are not truly independent values in the sequence.
It is actually quite unusual for a general-purpose language to treat strings as only a special case of
generic datatypes for arbitrary sequences of values.
Dafny could instead make `string` an alias for a different type, whether built-in or defined in Dafny source in the runtime or a standard library,
that treats strings as a more specialized datatype. It could then be more prescriptive about picking a definitive encoding to
support directly (most likely UTF-8).

This would certainly require more effort for existing code to migrate to.
It is also a much more expensive solution to implement, since it requires creating an API for strings
that is at least adequate to replace all existing usage of sequence operations.
These interfaces often become very large to support all common string operations efficiently,
and would need very careful thought.
Although unusual, representing strings directly as sequences of abstract characters

> works very well for a verification-focussed language like Dafny,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
works very well for a verification-focused language like Dafny,
```

Nice attempt at making Dafny more 🇨🇦

Author: You mean more `"\u{U+1F1E8]}\u{U+1F1E6}"`? :D

(i.e. "Regional Indicator Symbol Letter C" + "Regional Indicator Symbol Letter A". This is absolutely going to be all over my test cases as my canonical multi-scalar value character now.)

since sequences are already a deep built-in concept in the language semantics.

This new type could alternatively be introduced with a different name, such as `unicode` as in Python 2,
while keeping the alias of `string` for `seq<char>`.

> This would only increase the confusion and cognitive burden for Dafny users in the future, though.

Reviewer 2: Can we discuss how easy it will be for external code to wrap a native string type to give it Dafny's string API?  It would be nice if one could implement `ISequence<char>` using C# strings (plus some sanity checks), to save on conversions.

Author: I'm going to rewrite the `Compilation/Runtime` section to be more clear about this (as I intended that to address exactly this point, but I don't think it's clear enough yet)

Author: I THINK this should have enough detail but let me know otherwise.

## Add a new, distinct `rune` type

We could maintain the current definition of the `char` type, and introduce a new `rune` type to represent Unicode scalar values
instead ("rune" being the term both Go and C# use for this).
This would make it more obvious when reading Dafny source code in isolation whether it was using the new definitions of strings.
There are often few explicit references to individual character values in code that references string values, however,
and even when the `char` type is used it is often only implicitly referenced because of type inference.
This alternative does not seem to be worth the implementation cost or additional cognitive load on users,

> especially since it is hard to imagine any codebase needing to use both `char` and `rune` together.

Reviewer 2: The problem with `char` is that in unicode "character" refers to something that's pretty different from a scalar value (in particular, a "character" in unicode can be made up of more than one "scalar value").

Author: I was trying to say I would personally find it confusing to read code that uses both `char` to represent UTF-16 code units and `rune` to represent Unicode scalar values. Code like https://github.com/dafny-lang/libraries/tree/master/src/Unicode specifically doesn't connect the built-in `char` type to anything because it generalizes over multiple encoding forms and UTF-16 isn't special in that library.

You're also absolutely right that even with `/unicodeChar:1`, `char` still doesn't correspond to an abstract Unicode character. Perhaps you're arguing that we should deprecate `char` and replace it with `rune` to more aggressively avoid that confusion? I can add that as another option here: just deprecating `char` for now wouldn't be as disruptive as some of these options and could be worth it.

> especially since it is hard to imagine any codebase needing to use both `char` and `rune` together.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this (never using both char and rune): IIRC Windows file system APIs use sequences of Dafny-3 `char`s, not valid utf-16 strings.  

Maybe this just means that we'll have to build file system APIs with `seq<byte>` instead of `string`.

Author: Yeah, if you need to manipulate possibly-invalid sequences of UTF-16 code points, that should probably be a `seq<uint16>` instead.

I'm personally happy with the trade-off of a simpler, maximally correct and portable definition of `string` at the expense of making some specific APIs more ugly.

Author: Added an explicit note on this, and an open question on being able to compile to a native utf-16 type.

to the core definition of Dafny, and a much higher likelihood of having to change
the language definition or implementation to support future versions of Unicode.
It would also mean `char` can no longer be represented as a single integer value,
instead needing multiple scalar values in some cases,
which would be a large a deep change to the encoding of `char` in the Boogie prelude and translator.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Unicode has a long and messy history, and the approach to supporting Unicode varies dramatically across different programming languages.
Here is the current state of several popular programming languages, especially those that Dafny currently supports compiling to,
or could in the future:

## C#:

`char` is an alias for the `System.Char` value type, which represents a single character as a UTF-16 code unit. 
`string` is an alias for the `System.String` class, which represents an immutable sequence of `char` values.
The `System.Text.Rune` struct is provided to represent any Unicode scalar value,
and its API guarantees that invalid values (e.g. surrogates) will be rejected on construction.

> The method `String.EnumerateRunes()` produces the sequence of runes in a string via an `IEnumerator<Rune>`.

Reviewer 2: How does this API behave when given a string that is not a valid UTF-16 string?

Author: I've added detail on invalid data in several places now.

## Java:

`char` is one of the eight primitive types in Java, and also represents a UTF-16 code unit.
In recent versions of the Java Runtime Environment, the `java.lang.String` class supports

> encoding its data either in UTF-16 or in Latin-1, where the latter is an optimization for space

Reviewer 2: Does it support ill-formed sequences?

when all characters in the string are supported by this encoding. 

> Java does not included a dedicated type for Unicode scalar values

Reviewer 2: How does the API behave when given an int outside of the range of valid scalar values?

and instead uses the 32-bit wide `int` primitive type.

## Go:

In Go a string is a read-only slice of bytes, which generally contains UTF-8 encoded bytes

> but may contain arbitrary bytes. The `rune` type is an alias for `int32`.

Reviewer 2: How do the `rune-based` API behave when given an int outside of the range of valid scalar values?

## JavaScript:

The JavaScript `String` type represents an immutable sequence of UTF-16 code units as integer values.
There is no distinct type for representing individual characters.

## C++:

The `char` type represents bytes, and the `std::string` class from the standard library

> operates on bytes as character, and generally does not produce correct results if used

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this part:

> operates on bytes as character

together with any encoding other than single-byte encodings such as ASCII.
C++11 added two new character types, `char16_t` and `char32_t`, 
and two new corresponding `std::u16string` and `std::u32string` collection classes.
It also provides three new kinds of string literals,
`u8"..."`, `u"..."`, and `U"..."`,

> which produce binary values encoded with UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32 respectively.

Reviewer 2: What is a `binary value`?

## Rust:

The `char` type directly represents any Unicode scalar value, and rejects out-of-range values.
The "string slice" type `str` is the most primitive string type,
which is guaranteed to refers to valid UTF-8 data.
It primarily acts as a sequence of bytes, but directly provides many methods that work with `char` values:
`chars()` provides an iterator of `char` values,
`get(<slice>)` returns a subslice but produces `None` if the bounds do not align with UTF-8 sequence boundaries,
etc.

## Swift:

Swift defines `String` as a collection of characters,
and unusually defines `Character` as an [*extended grapheme cluster*](https://unicode.org/reports/tr29/#Grapheme_Cluster_Boundaries),
which is the closest concept to an atomic characeter as perceived visually by users.
Unicode scalar values are represented with a distinct `Unicode.Scalar` structure instead.
`String` provides `utf8`, `utf16`, and `unicodeScalars` views
that present the contents as sequences of UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32 code units respectively.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

Is there anything more we can do to make migration easier and safer for users?

> Chance are very good that all Dafny code in existence to date either will not change behavior

Reviewer 2: This seems overly optimistic to me WRT string literals, but I'm not sure how we plan to handle them.  At the moment they are sequences of characters mixed with UTF16 code units (possibly ill-formed), right? It would be good to specify what happens to them in `/unicodeChar:1`

Author: I think this is moot now but let me know otherwise.

Reviewer 2: There will be code that we won't be able to port (code using string literals with unpaired surrogates), but that's fine

Author: Yup, the worst case scenario will be code using `string` to carry such data, which the conversion utility (or verification with `/unicodeChar:1`) will reject, and the code will have to be rewritten to use `seq<uint16>` instead. I'm definitely okay with that, especially as I think it's much more likely such code will be unaware of the issue with unpaired surrogates rather than intentionally using the current definition of `string` to allow them.

across this change, or will slightly improve because of the improved handling of surrogate code points.
I have been unable to think of anything that would provide more value than the verifier will already provide,

> but I am open to suggestion as always!

Reviewer 2: Automatically converting old-style `\u` strings to new-style `\u{}` strings would be useful :)

Author: That's a fair point, and although I've clarified I don't intend to drop `\u` (just reject invalid sequences of them), even so that conversion utility would be very easy to implement.

Author: Now that I'm dropping `\u` I agree and will definitely provide a conversion utility.

native representations of strings, and baking in the assumption of UTF-16 imposes a complexity and performance
penalty for multiple target environments.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

As of Dafny 4.0, the default semantics of the `char` type have been changed to represent Unicode scalar values instead of UTF-16 code units.
This means that surrogate code points, meaning those in the range `[0xD800, 0xE000)`, are no longer allowed. This also means
code points that require more than 16 bits, meaning those in the range `[0x10000, 0x110000)`, are now directly representable
as `char` values.

The definition of the `char` type is controlled by a command-line switch called `/unicodeChar`, where `/unicodeChar:0`
enables the previous semantics and `/unicodeChar:1` enables the new semantics described above.
The default prior to Dafny 4.0 is `/unicodeChar:0`, but the default as of Dafny 4.0 is `/unicodeChar:1`.
This change in definition can cause previously verified code to no longer verify,
since expressions such as `someIntValue as char` or `someCharValue + 'a'` are no longer allowed to result in
surrogate code points.

> Using `/unicodeChar:1` will also cause the parser to reject `/uXXXX` UTF-16 code unit escape sequences,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using `/unicodeChar:1` will also cause the parser to reject `\uXXXX` UTF-16 code unit escape sequences,
```

such as the `"\uD800"` value above.
A new `\U{XXXXXX}` escape sequence is available to encode Unicode scalar values directly instead,

> accepting between one and dix hexadecimal digits.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
accepting between one and six hexadecimal digits.
```

in some cases converting from the UTF-8 encoding used for Dafny source text to UTF-16.
The `string` type, as an alias of `seq<char>`,
will not offer any direct ways to access the raw bytes used to encode the abstract value, 
which ensures Dafny code that uses strings can efficiently behave consistently across backends.
Enabling Unicode characters will change the target language types used to
represent characters and strings, and hence may be a breaking change when using additional external
target language code.

This change can also result in behavioral changes that may not be caught by verification,
as they may not intersect with any explicit specifications.
Here is an example of a program that will behave differently depending on the value of `/unicodeChar`,
and hence differently on Dafny 4.0 compared to earlier versions:

```dafny
method Main() {
  var s := "Unicode is just so \U{1F60E}";
  print s, "\n"     // "Unicode is just so 😎" (not affected by /unicodeChar)
  print |s|, "\n"   // /unicodeChar:0 => "21"
                    // /unicodeChar:1 => "20"
  print s[19], "\n" // /unicodeChar:0 => "�"
                    // /unicodeChar:1 => "😎"
}
```

> Note that a related but largely orthogonal issue [has been fixed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that a related but largely orthogonal issue has been fixed
```

such as the `char` primitive type in Rust or the `rune` alias for `int32` in Go.

The main complexity in implementing this change is minimizing the migration pain for
code bases that use `{:extern}` definitions to pass string values in and out of the Dafny runtime.
This generally requires converting between the internal representation of Dafny strings
and the native implementation in the target language,
e.g. between `Dafny.ISequence<char>` and `System.String` in C#.
Even there, the various Dafny runtime libraries provide helper methods that can be adjusted 
to work with the new semantics of Unicode characters.
In the C# runtime, for example, the `Sequence.FromString(string)` method converts a native string
to an equivalent `Dafny.ISequence<char>` copy.
A parallel method named something similar to `Sequence.UnicodeFromString(string)` could be added
that would return a `Dafny.ISequence<uint32>` copy instead.
Migrating an existing codebase should reduce to a simple find-and-replace operation.

Note that this aspect of the foreign function interface in Dafny is best handled on a per-backend basis.

> It isn't generally tractable to define a single `NativeString` type with consistent semantics,

Reviewer 4: Could you specify in more details what the limitations of a `NativeString` type would be?

I imagine it would be a subset of a collection type with linear time access, like 

```type NativeString = x: LinkedListTrait<char> | ValidInAllRuntimes(x)```

The LinkedList would warn users against doing random access on individual characters, since that may take linear time depending on the runtime.

There would be some native methods on `NativeString` like `Concat(right: NativeString): NativeString` (linear in total length) and `Take(n: nat): NativeString` (linear in n). Something like `SubString(start: nat, length: nat)` might not exist because that would be linear not just in `length` but also in `start`, which is surprising.

and hence one conversion function may fail where another cannot.

The above conversion functions currently copy data,
but each runtime should instead make it possible to wrap an idiomatic representation of a Unicode string
as the runtime representation of the Dafny `seq<char>` type, without having to make an additional copy. 
At the time of writing this, only the Java runtime supports this feature,
via a `StringDafnySequence` class that wraps a `java.lang.String` value and implements the `ISequence<Character>` interface.
Another similar parallel `UnicodeStringDafnySequence` adaptor can be provided that implements `ISequence<Integer>` instead.

The one wrinkle with this feature is that methods such as `select(i)`, which implement Dafny expressions such as `s[i]`,
currently take constant time on an `StringDafnySequence`, since a `java.lang.String` also stores its contents as UTF-16
code units. However, if `UnicodeStringDafnySequence.select(i)` will need to produce the i'th Unicode scalar value instead,
this will require decoding all characters up to that index, which will take linear time in general instead.

> There are at two three possible approaches a given backend can take:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are at least two possible approaches a given backend can take:
```

we could push further and define it to mean an [*extended grapheme cluster*](https://unicode.org/reports/tr29/#Grapheme_Cluster_Boundaries),
which is the Unicode concept closest to what humans perceive visually as a distinct, atomic "character".
This would make operations on strings as sequences of values correspond more closely to meaningful concepts on text,
such as `|s|` actually providing a "character count" that aligns with expectations in a word processor.

Although there are definite benefits to this approach for logic that heavily processes text
(and is the approach that the [Swift](#swift) language takes, for example),
the definition of how scalar values are grouped into grapheme clusters
is much more complicated and locale-specific than the simple mathematical rules of common encodings
like UTF-8 and UTF-16. This means a higher cost and risk of bugs in adding these concepts
to the core definition of Dafny, and a much higher likelihood of having to change
the language definition or implementation to support future versions of Unicode.
It would also mean `char` can no longer be represented as a single integer value,
instead needing multiple scalar values in some cases,

> which would be a large a deep change to the encoding of `char` in the Boogie prelude and translator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which would be a large and deep change to the encoding of `char` in the Boogie prelude and translator.
```

Here is the current state of several popular programming languages, especially those that Dafny currently supports compiling to,
or could in the future:

## C#:

`char` is an alias for the `System.Char` value type, which represents a single character as a UTF-16 code unit. 
`string` is an alias for the `System.String` class, which represents an immutable sequence of `char` values.
The `System.Text.Rune` struct is provided to represent any Unicode scalar value,
and its API guarantees that invalid values (e.g. surrogates) will be rejected on construction.
The method `String.EnumerateRunes()` produces the sequence of runes in a string via an `IEnumerator<Rune>`.
Any invalid UTF-16 sequences are enumerated as the `U+FFFD` "Replacement Character" `Rune` value.

## Java:

`char` is one of the eight primitive types in Java, and also represents a UTF-16 code unit.
In recent versions of the Java Runtime Environment, the `java.lang.String` class supports
encoding its data either in UTF-16 or in Latin-1, where the latter is an optimization for space
when all characters in the string are supported by this encoding.
A `String` value may contain invalid sequences such as unpaired surrogates.

> Java does not included a dedicated type for Unicode scalar values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Java does not include a dedicated type for Unicode scalar values
```

This change in definition can cause previously verified code to no longer verify,
since expressions such as `someIntValue as char` or `someCharValue + 'a'` are no longer allowed to result in
surrogate code points.
Using `/unicodeChar:1` will also cause the parser to reject invalid string literals,
such as the `"\uD800"` value above.
This ensures Dafny string literals can always be represented in UTF-8, UTF-16, or any other Unicode encoding.

The exact representation of strings at runtime, including the particular encoding,
is an implementation detail of a particular backend, and will often be optimized for the idioms and support
of the target environment. 

> This also applies to string literals in Dafny source code:

Reviewer 2: This is better but still ambiguous.  Maybe it's enough to say that strings literals are as in Dafny 3, except for the fact that unpaired surrogates are disallowed?

Author: That's only true w.r.t. what literals are permitted in source text though (with the added `\U{X..X}` escape sequence), not how they are represented at runtime. I do want to say that, unlike in Dafny 3, users shouldn't assume a string literal becomes a sequence where every ASCII character or `\u` escape sequence literally becomes an individual element of that sequence. I want to call out that if you compile your program to Go, for example, your literal will likely become a Go `string` value wrapped as a `Dafny.Sequence<rune>`.

Author: Again I'm hoping that dropping support for `\u` makes this clearer.
